This convention program will be translated into more than 450 languages.
This work is supported by branch offices around the globe.
Each of us has an opportunity to show appreciation for the spiritual blessings we have received in our own language.
One way we can do this is by making voluntary gifts in accord with our circumstances.
Donations can be made online at donate.jw.org.
Whether young or old, we face tests of faith.
Changing circumstances can bring new challenges.
How can we meet each test with unwavering faith?
We invite you to put yourself in the scene as you watch the drama, Daniel, a lifetime of faith, Part 1.
My King.
General.
We starve them out, but your Hayek can still live.
Negotiations don't concern your general when competence does.
Finish it!
You'll not find me as forgiving as the gods.
Yes, my King.
The whole of army says, because you did not obey my words, all this land will be reduced to ruins.
And this land and its inhabitants will have to serve the King of Babylon for 70 years.
Daniel, where have you been? It's on the sundown.
Sorry, Jeremiah was speaking today and I stopped by the temple on the way home.
Well, we're almost ready.
We're at the temple again today.
I was.
To gaze upon the pleasantness of Jehovah.
And to look with appreciation upon his temple.
I have something for you.
So you can always have Jehovah's words with you.
Thank you, Papa.
What's wrong? What's going to happen to us?
What always happens to Jehovah's faithful servants?
Have no fear.
Jehovah is our shield.
It's ready.
Let's sing.
Son, pick a song.
Jehovah is my light in my salvation.
You always choose heaven.
Who's him?
I know Zark.
Sure.
And who will you be?
You're things.
We have to go.
We don't live here anymore.
Who's him?
Grab our bags.
What's going on?
Daniel.
Of the tribe of Judah.
You will receive training in the house of the great king, Nebuchadnezzar.
But this is my family.
Prince's and Noble's belonging the pal.
He's not a prince.
He's just a boy.
Please.
I will go.
If it's a servant, you see.
No.
I'm taking the boy.
Daniel.
Wait.
Can we say goodbye?
Make it quick.
He's strong, my son.
Jehovah is with you.
Michelle.
Have you seen anyone else?
You didn't think we'd let you come here alone, did you?
That's right.
Get an eye out.
Is this kids' lawn on the high side?
Nice to meet you.
Have you seen Joseph?
Have you heard of his house?
No, like Joseph in the dungeon.
Doesn't seem so bad to me.
Quick.
Kisla.
Move.
You have been chosen because you were wise.
But you are lacking.
You will learn our writing.
And our language.
You will be given new names.
And at the end of three years,
you will serve the great king, Nebuchadnezzar.
Today, you are foreigners.
Tomorrow?
The God's willing.
Avalonians.
Meshach.
You look like a Meshach.
Our new names sound like their gods.
New names, new language.
Soon they want us to worship their gods.
Calm down.
My father had idols.
And he worshiped Jehovah.
Did you see the same city I did?
It's the center of the world.
We'll even eat from the king's table.
But do Babylonians eat?
His servants are given only the best.
Is there a problem?
Our God doesn't allow us to eat such foods.
Do you feel your God?
I do.
Well, I am afraid of my Lord the King.
Who has assigned your food and drink?
He insists on these selections
to maintain your strength and vitality.
What if he should see you looking worse than appearance
than the other youths?
Who would make me guilty before the king?
I must obey the king.
So much to you.
All of you.
When dinner is served, I expect you to be hungry.
You don't speak for us.
You're right.
You can make your own choice.
Didn't you hear him?
We don't have a choice.
He's a new land with new laws.
So what if some of the food is unblood?
It's just food.
But Jehovah commanded us not to eat blood.
It's your interpretation.
You must not eat any blood at all.
What's too interpret in that?
Maybe we should all take a moment and pray.
Pray.
Here.
What's the point?
Jehovah's in Israel.
We're in Babylon now.
Don't you believe Jehovah's here too?
Jehovah said that we're his witnesses.
What will people say about Jehovah
if we give in and break his laws?
Your meal is ready.
Did you hear me?
Thank you.
But if we eat those foods, we'll disobey our God.
Is it a starve?
No, of course not.
He forbids us from eating blood and food that he calls unclean.
Please, test your servants for ten days.
And let us be given some vegetables to eat
and water to drink.
Vegetables.
Just give us ten days.
And then deal with your servants according to what you see.
Ten days.
Ashman has this something to do.
Oh Lord, he's young men or woman.
I know who they are.
We've been watching you.
You don't bow to our idols.
You pray only to your God
and you are not eating our foods.
They insisted that their God would not eat them.
And somehow, you look healthier than the others.
Continue giving them the diet they've requested.
And built a chasar?
Your future is bright.
Don't waste it.
Bring in the next group.
A little ration would be 15 kuru,
2 Payna and 5 Suta.
Correct.
How much interest may emerge in charge on money
and green?
It would be 40% by Lord.
40%?
Have you learned going to be a thief in the past three years?
And you, Mishak?
The rate is 20%.
Very good.
Which star of Enlil is brightest in the Urgola constellation?
Do you know?
It is the Lugow star.
Impressive.
There is a tower that is high.
But nonetheless has no shade.
What is it?
Your ziggurat?
Hopeless.
You can solve the riddle?
It is sunlight, my Lord.
Correct.
My wisemen teach that the gods are responsible for everything.
If that's so, why do the good suffer
and the evil prosper?
As you say, O King,
the wise do not always have the food.
Nor do the intelligent always have the riches.
Nor do those with knowledge always have success
because time and unexpected events overtake them all.
Who wrote those words?
Solomon.
Fame for his wisdom.
But its source was his God,
our God, Jehovah.
Take them away.
You went to your return.
You won't.
Go back to your families.
Prove them worth this.
Built the sheds are no.
Not the four of you.
We have more to discuss.
I did not know you're gone.
But you've proven to be ten times better than any priest
or conjurer I've met.
Ashpinaz will arrange for you to serve in the palace
with my wisemen.
Maybe your gifts are wasted in Jerusalem.
But here they'll be put to use.
The victory in Jerusalem is complete.
Our forces are not preparing to be seized higher.
They should remember what happened to Zedakaya.
The gods are with us.
Jira, what is it?
It's about Jerusalem.
Where are you going?
To see my family.
It's wrong.
It's Jerusalem.
They tore down the walls.
They torched its towers.
Many died.
And they burned down Jehovah's house.
I didn't know people listened.
Did they think Jehovah couldn't see what they were doing?
As long as our temple existed,
our people had hope.
As long as Jehovah exists,
we have hope.
But he's rejected us.
Because of our unrighteousness.
He hasn't not everyone.
Jehovah told Ezekiel
that in his eyes,
you,
or his righteous,
his Noah,
and Job,
he said that.
He did.
If Jehovah cares so much,
then why are we an exile?
Why can't we go home?
Why can't we be together?
You are home, son.
Don't have all the answers.
Stay close to Jehovah.
You will be blessed.
I've had a dream.
And I'm agitated.
And I know what I dreamed.
Okay.
May you live on forever.
Relate the dream to your service.
We will tell the interpretation.
No.
If you don't make the dream known to me,
along with the interpretation,
you'll be dismembered.
And your houses will be turned to public latrines.
But if you do tell me the dream,
and the interpretation,
you'll receive gifts
and a reward and great honor.
You've agreed to tell me something false
and deceitful to a situation changes.
This deceitful?
This deceitful!
There is not a man on earth who can do with the King demands.
What the King is asking is difficult.
No one exists and tell this to the King except...
except the gods.
Ariac?
Seize them.
Jira.
You're in danger.
Why? What happened?
I didn't hear anything.
But the Weisman angered the King.
Everyone's to be executed by dawn.
Bring Hanania, Michelle, and Ezoraya here.
I'll try to learn more.
Yes.
Teldian, Egyptian, Jewish.
All the Weisman.
Ariac.
Of the Shazar.
You shouldn't be here.
Why is there such a harsh water from the King?
He had a dream.
And no one can tell him what it is.
Flea now.
If you speak before dawn, you might survive.
Without wisdom!
What are you doing here?
I need to speak with the King.
You need to go.
Please let me speak with him.
My Lord, this is Belta Shazar.
Okay.
Interpretations belong to my God, Jehovah.
He knows your dream and what it means.
Where is your God? Where?
I believe that he...
I know that he will reveal it to me.
Please, give me time.
We have until morning.
To do what?
To reveal the dream to the King.
How much of the dream is Jehovah revealed to you?
Well, nothing yet.
But Jehovah revealed that he would interpret it.
Right?
Not exactly.
Daniel, how do you know this is even going to happen?
Well, I can't be sure.
You'd better be sure.
His name is at stake.
If he reveals the dream, it proves that he's the true God.
If?
What can we do to help?
Pray.
Pray that Jehovah have mercy on us.
Oh, Jehovah.
Surely you didn't bring us here just to die.
What will people say?
We told them that you are the God of the heavens,
the only God who can reveal secrets.
Please, vindicate yourself.
Jira!
I found a man from the axiles of Judah
who could make no interpretation to the King.
I know who he is.
Can you really make known to me the dream that I saw?
And his interpretation.
There is a God in the heavens who is a revealer of secrets.
And he has made known to King Nebuchadnezzar
what is to happen in the final part of the days.
This is your dream.
You saw an immense image
of standing in front of you.
You yourself are the head of gold
after you another kingdom will rise
inferior to you.
Then another kingdom,
a third one of copper
that will rule over the whole earth.
As for the fourth kingdom,
it will be strong like iron.
The kingdom will be divided
and as the toes of the feet
were partly of iron and partly of clay,
so the kingdom will be partly strong
and partly fragile.
In the days of those kings,
the God of heaven will set up a kingdom
that will never be destroyed.
And this kingdom will not be passed
onto any other people
and put an end to all these kingdoms.
The dream is true
and its interpretation is trustworthy.
Quick, bring the fine robe
and a necklace of gold
earned an instance before him.
Truly your God is a God of gods
and a Lord of kings
and a revealer of secrets.
May your God be honored
by the honor I give you.
You are now ruler
over all the province of Babylon.
O King,
these servants also worship the God in the heavens.
May they too be appointed
to administer the province.
Make the necessary arrangements.
You have proven far superior
and they so-called wise men.
I now appoint you
their chief prefect.
Did you hear it in every caneser?
When he said,
your God is a God of gods
and a Lord of kings,
Jehovah entered your prayer.
Jehovah answered our prayers.
What's going to happen next?
Can we go back to Jerusalem?
I don't know what happens next,
but as long as we stay close to Jehovah,
you will always be with us
as long as we have faith in Him.
There's nothing in the stars
about kingdom's crushing kingdoms.
Of course not.
It's a trick.
But how did he know the dream?
I'm a root you wouldn't
put a message from the gods.
I have examined a sheep's liver.
Your future is bright.
Stars of Shabbatue,
the giant,
speak only of your grandeur.
And I'm the head of gold.
Jehovah said so.
Your dream revealed many good things.
But...
You spelled the Shazzar?
He's a Jew.
It's a clever Jew to be sure,
he couldn't interpret dreams before he came to Babylon.
He first had to be educated here,
and given a Babylonian name,
a name that honors our great God, Bell.
Bell used this young captive
to reveal great things to you.
Bell,
not Jehovah who you defeated in Jerusalem.
So the tree is my enemies.
Who is it after the seven times Passover?
Then it is you again, a great king.
You are fools.
At last,
Belta Shazzar,
Chief of the Magic Practicing Priests,
all of the otherwise men are unable
to make the interpretation known to me.
But you're able to do so.
Explain to me the visions I've seen in my dreams.
What did you dream?
I saw a tree in the midst of the earth,
and it's height.
It was enormous.
And the tree grew.
And it became strong.
And it's top.
And it's a hand.
Iron, and of copper.
So who's the tree?
In the dream apply to those hating you,
and its interpretation to your enemies.
The tree that you saw.
That grew great and became strong,
and its top reached the heavens,
and was visible to all the earth.
Which had beautiful foliage,
abundant fruit,
and food for all.
Beneath which the beasts of the field would dwell,
and on whose branches,
the birds of the heavens would reside.
It is you,
O King,
and the King saw a watcher,
a holy one,
coming down from the heavens,
who was saying,
But leave the stump with its roots in the ground,
with a banding of iron and of copper,
and let the dew of the heavens make it wet,
to portion thee with the beasts of the field,
until seven times pass over it.
This is the interpretation, O King.
It is the decree of the most high.
You will be driven away from among men,
and your dwelling will be with the beasts of the field.
And you will be given vegetation to eat,
just like bowls,
and you will become wet with the dew of the heavens.
And seven times will pass over you,
until you know,
that the most high is ruler in the kingdom of mankind,
and that he grants it to whomever he wants.
But because they said to leave the stump of the tree with its roots,
your kingdom will be yours again.
After you come to know,
that the heavens are ruling,
turn away from your sins,
by doing what is right,
and from your iniquity by showing mercy to the poor,
it may be that your prosperity will be extended.
Does Belta Shazzar know in this world?
No.
But your wise men,
doubt that his interpretation can be trusted.
Look at the facts.
Egypt's gods told the Egyptians
that they would defeat us,
yet you destroyed them.
So why should the god of the Jews be given any more credit?
Look at what you've done.
The gods are with you.
You have made Babylon the greatest kingdom on earth.
Belta Shazzar wants you to grovel like a slave.
You.
A strong king means a strong king.
Let's continue with our discussion.
The stars of Enville,
now the Luke out star,
is the brightest star in the Ergola constellation.
Stars are reliable.
Unlike the gods of defeated nations,
go back to Jews.
Oh, you could,
if there was anything left of it.
Jehovah revealed anything new.
It's been ten months.
Still no sign of this supposed insanity.
I trust my god.
Yes, as we do,
when we read the stars.
But we still shape the message.
You will be held responsible for the words.
And when a wise man speaks lies.
I spoke only what Jehovah revealed.
Have you forgotten?
What happened when some couldn't interpret the dream image?
A death sentence followed.
And that was a flattering interpretation.
That the king was ahead of gold.
This time, you said he'll go mad.
And nothing has happened.
It will happen.
Maybe. Maybe not.
But your words are against the king.
It's treason.
And no one can protect you from that.
Ten months.
Nothing has happened.
But your words are against the king.
Still no sign of this supposed insanity.
It's treason.
And no one can protect you from that.
Always words with you.
Instruct me in your way,
Oh, Jehovah.
Do not hand me over to my adversaries.
For false witnesses have risen up against me.
And they threaten me with violence.
Where would I be if I did not have faith?
That I would see Jehovah's goodness in the land of the living?
Please, test your servants for ten days.
Somehow, you look healthier than the others.
Continue giving them the diet they've requested.
I did not know your God.
But you've proven ten times better than any priest or conjurer I've met.
He had a dream.
And no one can tell him what it is.
Jehovah, answer, Jehovah.
Hope in Jehovah.
The courageous and strong of heart.
Yes.
Hope in Jehovah.
Persecify us to build.
To the gods.
This city.
It's the jewel of the world.
The Ishtar Gate.
The gardens.
The Zigarots.
So high.
It reaches the gods themselves.
No one would question that.
It's odd that only twelve months ago, one of your servants,
dared to suggest that you go and say...
Is this not Babylon the Great?
That I myself have built for the royal house.
With my own strength and might.
And for the glory of my majesty.
To you, it is being said.
Oh, King Nebuchadnezzar.
The kingdom has gone away from you.
And from mankind, you are being driven away.
With the beasts of the field, your dwelling will be.
And you will be given vegetation to eat.
Just like bulls.
And seven times will pass over you.
Until you know.
That the most high is ruler in the kingdom of mankind.
And that he grants it to whoever he wants.
Consistently.
How can you claim Daniel to be a fraud?
This was a trick.
Daniel conspired against your father.
A trick.
Then how did he make it happen?
Everything he has said has come true.
Which is quite different from what he's written from you.
My father was a brother.
Who is this god in the heavens?
Jehovah.
What a thrilling drama.
And there's much more to learn from the life of Daniel.
We will enjoy part two during the final session of this convention.
Like Daniel, we encounter some who oppose and misrepresent us.
How can we prevent our faith from being undermined?
Please pay close attention to brother David's explain to the governing body.
As he delivers the talk, put up a hard fight for the faith.
Now those are the words of Jude, the half-brother of Jesus.
And it's important to consider them in their context.
So let's do that.
Please turn to Jude, verse three.
And then even Bibles open because we're going to consider another verse in Jude.
And this will help us to get the point that Jude was making.
Jude, verse three, he says beloved ones.
Although I was making every effort to write you about the salvation we hold in common,
I found it necessary to write you to urge you to put up a hard fight for the faith.
Now Jude himself had been putting up a hard fight for the faith.
Consider this, just three years earlier, his own fleshly brother James.
His own fleshly brother James was stone to death at the order of high priest Ananias.
That was an open attack on God's people.
And it must have been very painful to Jude and to others.
And here's something interesting.
Jude is not warning his brothers about high priest Ananias or about persecution.
He has something else in mind, a different type of attack.
And this is a sneaky one. Let's look at verse four.
And we'll see why he wrote his letter.
Notice the very first words.
My reason is, so this is what I have in mind when I'm writing you brothers.
My reason is that certain men have slipped in among you who were long ago appointed to this judgment by the Scriptures.
So Jude is talking about false brothers who are presenting a real danger to the congregations in some ways.
A greater danger than outright persecution.
And did you notice what Jude said about those false brothers?
They had slipped in.
They were sneaky.
That was true back then and it's true today as we'll see.
And brothers, this is a very serious matter that we're considering today.
Think of this.
Was the Christian congregation brought down by persecution in the second and third centuries?
It wasn't.
It was brought down by false brothers, apostate, teachings.
And so the devil can use an outright attack.
He can use persecution to try to better the structure of the Christian congregation.
But sometimes he uses rot from within.
A subtle means to attack us.
But whatever method he uses, we have to fight.
Our faith is involved and our faith is worth fighting for.
It's a gift from Jehovah.
We have to hold onto it.
It's a product of his Holy Spirit.
So we have to put up a hard fight for our faith.
So in this talk, we're not going to discuss persecution.
We're going to discuss two of the subtle means Satan uses to weaken our faith.
Apostasy and negative reports about Jehovah's Witnesses in the media.
So first, let's talk about apostasy.
And we'll call it spiritual poison.
Now think about poison.
What's the best way to avoid being poisoned?
Well, we have to recognize poison when we see it, and then avoid it.
And the same principle applies to teachings that could destroy our faith.
And that's not always easy.
Now, not many of our brothers and sisters would deliberately get involved with apostates.
But it could happen without realizing it.
We receive letters at times from brothers and sisters who were troubled by something they saw on a web page.
An accusation, a rumor about the society or about the organization.
And the problem is they had no idea that apostates were behind it.
It's tricky because the apostates don't advertise you are now on an apostate web page.
They often pose as sincere witnesses who just have questions or concerns.
And some who aren't really apostates can cause just as much trouble as the apostates do by their negative talk and criticism.
Brothers, we need to be on the alert.
This is serious.
Suppose that out of curiosity, you get into a discussion forum with individuals who claim to meet Jehovah's Witnesses.
Now maybe they are, maybe they are, you don't know.
You've never met them.
And someone starts asking questions.
What did you think of last month's broadcast?
Did you really find it encouraging?
Or do you think the brothers who write watched our articles are living in the real world?
I wonder if they realize just how hard it is out here.
And then a few others join in with their own negative comments.
Now you don't know whether these individuals are apostates or just brothers and sisters who were in serious spiritual trouble.
But does it matter?
How does it make you feel when you leave the forum?
Do you feel upbuilt?
Determined to expand your ministry?
More convinced than ever that Jehovah has an organization that you love and that you're delighted to be a part of you feel honored to be a part of that organization.
Or does the experience leave you sad?
Uneasy, uncomfortable.
Now someone might say, I need to get involved in that forum so I can help those people.
They shouldn't be together.
Even if they aren't apostates, they're not good for one another.
Staying in that forum to help someone is like holding his hand while he drinks poison and then having some yourself so he doesn't have to drink alone.
We need to follow the advice recorded at Romans chapter 16 and verse 17.
Now think of this imaginary forum that we just described in the light of Romans chapter 16 and verse 17.
Remember there's all kinds of negative top flying around in this forum.
You don't know who's behind it.
And here's what it says in Romans 16 verse 17.
Now I urge you brothers to keep your eye on those who create divisions and causes for stumbling contrary to the teaching that you have learned and avoid them.
Now think about that forum.
Does it create divisions?
Yes.
Is it a cause for stumbling?
Could be.
Is it contrary to what we have learned?
Do we even have to answer that question?
Now whether it's intended or not, the effect will be to weaken our faith.
So what do we do?
What does Paul tell us to do here at the end of verse 17?
He says, avoid them.
No, I'd like to say a kind word to some who may be involved in discussion forums.
You may like to use this medium to blow off steam, so to speak.
Maybe there are little things in the congregation that are happening that you wonder about or decisions the elders have made that you wonder about.
And so you get involved in the forum and you blow off steam and after that you feel better.
But what about others in the forum?
How do they feel?
Wouldn't you feel awful if negative comments you made were responsible for someone leaving the truth?
I know you wouldn't want that to happen.
So please, please, be careful about what you say.
Now another person might say, well, I can see where those warnings about apostates applied to so and so.
He's weak, but don't worry about me.
I'm spiritually strong.
I can handle it.
That's like a weightlifter, thinking that he can drink a vial of poison and it won't hurt him because he's so big and strong.
We are not so strong, so spiritual, so intelligent, that we can't be affected by the poison of apostate ideas.
Now, when might we feel pressured to read something that the apostates have written?
Consider this scenario.
The unbelieving husband of your Bible student sends his wife a link to an apostate web page and says,
here, you better look at this and see what you're getting into.
While your student is concerned, she wants you to take a look and tell her what you think.
Well, that's not an option.
Paul says, avoid them.
That doesn't mean reading apostate literature or searching social media to see what they're saying about us.
So what do you say to your student?
You might say something like this.
I can imagine that this is very upsetting for you.
And you certainly do need to know what you're getting into.
I have a suggestion.
We have nothing to hide.
When you're at the meetings, listen carefully to what the brothers are saying.
Watch how we interact with one another.
That note of how the organization is financed.
Get to know the elders, their wives.
Introduce yourself to the circuit overseer and his wife when they come.
Visit world headquarters of the branch.
I'll come with you. I'll help you.
And I want you to get really acquainted with the organization.
And if you do, I'm sure you'll soon realize that what the people are saying about us isn't true.
Well, maybe you can think of a better answer, but you get the idea.
Just a few drops of poison in a drink are enough to cause serious harm.
And apostate often makes a few truths with lies.
Remember, LFS, one of Job's false comforters?
Some of what he said was true.
Let's turn to Job chapter 5 and verse 13.
Job chapter 5, I'll give you a moment, and verse 13.
See if what I read sounds familiar.
He catches the wise in their own cunning,
so that the plans of the should are thwarted.
He catches the wise in their own coming, cunning.
Does that sound familiar?
Oh, yes.
The Apostle Paul said the very same thing at first wrench in 319.
In fact, in the marginal reference that we see in the little A,
in the middle there, first Corinthians 319.
Paul may even have been quoting LFS.
So that was the truth.
But how did Jehovah feel about LFS's argument overall?
Let's turn to Job 42, verse 7, and see how Jehovah felt about it.
Job 42, and verse 7.
After Jehovah had spoken these words to Job,
Jehovah said to Elephaz the team night,
My anger burns against you and your true companions,
for you have not spoken the truth about me,
as my servant Job has.
A few grains of truth were mixed in with falsehoods,
and at least some of what Elephaz said was inspired by the demons.
How do we know that?
He had mannered it, known as Job 4,
verses 15 through 17.
I'll give you a moment, this is interesting.
Job 4, 15 to 17.
Elephaz says, a spirit passed over my face.
The hair of my flesh bristled.
It then stood still.
But I did not recognize its appearance.
Let's stop there for a second.
I did not recognize its appearance,
so he didn't know whom he was talking to,
just like someone in a discussion forum may not know
whom he is talking to.
Let's continue.
He says, a former was in front of my eyes.
There was a calm,
and then I heard a voice,
kind of mortal man be more righteous than God,
kind of man be cleaner than his own maker.
Does it surprise you that a demon
will get involved in the debate between Job and the false comforters?
He shouldn't.
This was no small debate.
He was a big issue.
Satan had challenged Jehovah in the presence of all the angels
that no man would keep his integrity under test.
That demon was using Elephaz to demoralize Job
and weaken his faith.
This was something that Job had to fight for,
and Job fought back.
Apostates are more active in some places than they are in others.
So if there's a lot of apostate activity in your area,
people in the territory may be listening,
may challenge you when you meet them in the ministry.
So how should you handle it?
Don't try to argue with the apostates.
Don't read their comments.
Ask the elders or other experienced publishers for suggestions
on how to answer the householders.
Well, how poisonous are apostate teachings?
Let's find out as we watch the following video.
When I was in my 40s, I was divorced.
I had three younger kids at home.
I was working three jobs,
and I had drifted away from the congregation.
I had an acquaintance who was telling me that I was an occult
and that I needed to look at some information that he had.
When I was about 30 years old,
a fellow employee saw that I was one of Jehovah's Witnesses
and was trying to access JW.org.
He told me about someone he knew in another country
who could prove to me that Jehovah's Witnesses didn't have the truth.
That made me curious.
And little by little, I was persuaded to look in apostate material.
So I was born and raised in the truth,
chose to dedicate myself to Jehovah at the age of 16.
But I began to associate with people who had either formerly been associated with the truth
or were very loosely associated with Jehovah in his organization.
And that's really where the apostasy began to take root.
As I was reading this literature,
I saw through it to an extent.
But when you're drifting away,
you're looking for a reason not to believe.
I began to feed my mind with different philosophies, different ideas,
even studied different religions.
And you know, I told myself that I was doing that academically,
but it started to influence the way that I thought and felt about things.
Eventually, the elders reached out to me.
I was very combative with those brothers.
I even made the accusation that Noah's Ark was a fairy tale
that that was part of mythology.
Those apostate doubts that I was reading kept going deeper and deeper into my heart.
I stopped reading the publications.
I stopped going to the meetings.
And as a result, my spiritual routine was dead.
So I thought I'd try to find truth elsewhere.
And I looked for something out there that was in accord with what I knew the Bible taught.
But I couldn't find anything.
Well, one Sunday morning, I rode by the Kingdom Hall,
and I said to myself,
oh, they're all in there waiting for Armageddon.
Immediately, when I thought that thought, I said to myself,
well, at least they feel good about themselves.
How do you feel?
And the answer was, I felt terrible.
Eventually, skillful use of the scriptures and just reasoning with me,
the elders got me to realize that I had been carried off
or that I had been taken captive by human philosophy,
by the deceptions and this empty reasoning of men.
I actually said a prayer.
I supplicated Jehovah that he would really show me the way to the truth.
And he took away this feeling of emptiness, spiritually speaking.
I realized that relationship with Jehovah,
that's our most precious possession, I had to get back.
I started to study the Bible with sincerity.
I wanted it to affect my mind and my heart.
And I wanted it to affect change in my behavior.
Now, as I did that, I felt Jehovah blessing those efforts.
He began to help me to rebuild that relationship with him.
So I began to use Jehovah's name.
Speaking about Jehovah became a wonderful joy and a great pleasure to me.
And the result was that my ministry was very productive.
And it's an amazing joy to be able to help someone come to love Jehovah.
I was just so happy to be back under Jehovah's wings and have that peace of mind.
How loving Jehovah is, he wants to help us.
And what better help could we have?
He's the best in the universe.
Now, let's consider the second challenge we face.
Negative reports about Jehovah's witnesses in the media.
Now, here's a good principle to follow.
Proverbs 14 and verse 15.
I'll give you a moment.
It says, the naive person believes every word,
but the shrewd one ponders each step.
Some people believe everything they read in the newspaper or see on TV.
Do you?
Should you?
Consider this.
Now, you're working from door to door.
And you meet a householder who says,
you and Jehovah's witnesses are terrible people.
You let your children die.
You don't accept medical treatment.
Well, you asked the householder,
do you know any of Jehovah's witnesses personally?
No.
Then, where did you get the idea that we let our children die?
And don't accept medical treatment.
The householder says,
I have it on good authority.
I read it in the newspaper.
Well, if it's in the newspaper,
it must be true, right?
Not necessarily.
Remember this.
Reporters have a deadline to meet.
And a reporter may not have the time or the inclination to check the facts.
Or, the reporter may have written a balance article,
but then the editor changes it.
Maybe the editor doesn't like Jehovah's witnesses,
or he's been misinformed about us.
Now, it's bad enough.
If people in the world believe everything they read in the newspaper,
but brothers, let's not be among them.
Let's not be naive.
Let's consider things carefully.
Similarly, sometimes there's a TV program about Jehovah's witnesses.
Now, a few of these programs are balanced and fair.
Many, or I dare say, most are not.
And when they're not, you'll often find that the producers started out
with a negative view of Jehovah's witnesses,
and then they looked for information to support their prejudice.
So whom did they turn to?
Apostates and the clergy.
From them, they got suggestions for people to interview.
And we know what those people would say.
At the very last minute,
they may ask the brothers for comment just to give an appearance of fairness,
but the program wasn't designed to be fair.
It was designed to be unfair.
It was slanted against Jehovah's witnesses.
Now, let's be clear.
Some news organizations are very conscientious about their reporting,
and they want to present both sides of an issue.
And when Jehovah's witnesses are concerned, they do so at their cost.
If a newspaper publishes anything positive about us,
the churches will push back.
Our parishioners are upset.
They subscribe to your newspaper,
and they don't like reading favorable things about Jehovah's witnesses.
The message, if it ever happens again,
they're going to lose subscribers.
Now, this matter of Jehovah's people being the subject of malicious reports
isn't new.
Think about the days of Queen Esther.
Wicked Heyman brings a bad report to King Ahazuerus.
The Jews don't obey our laws.
They're a danger to society.
Does Ahazuerus check the facts?
Does he demand proof?
No.
Ahazuerus is naive.
He allows himself to be taken in by Heyman.
Well, there are a lot of modern day Heyman's today,
and they use similar tactics.
As a result, some government officials are taken in.
They believe the slanderous accusations of the apostates.
Now, if they just take the time to check the facts,
they'd see that they're being lied to,
but they don't check the facts.
Now, again, it's bad enough, brothers,
when government officials are taken in by false reports,
don't you be taken in?
Have you ever heard the expression trial by a media?
It works like this, someone's charged with a crime,
and the case is widely publicized in the media,
and the media present the case in such a way
that everyone who hears about it thinks the man is guilty.
Of course, to avoid a lawsuit for slander or liable,
these media reports are very carefully worded,
and we need to understand what the wording means.
Here's a good principle to keep in line.
Job, chapter 12, and verse 11.
It's amazing how many principles we can draw
from the book of Job for this talk.
Job, chapter 12, and verse 11.
This is Job speaking, and he says,
Does not the ear test out words as the tongue tastes food?
Does not the ear test out words?
What does that mean?
Does it mean that if we learn that apostates
are going to be featured on a TV program,
we should watch it to see if what they say is true?
No.
It basically means to consider the source of the words.
If they are the words of apostates,
why would we believe them?
Now, think of it this way.
You have a model on your self that's marked poison.
Do you need to open it up?
Take a swing to see if it really is poison?
Believe what the label says.
Now, for the purpose of this discussion,
let's consider another way we can test out words.
And that is to pay attention to what the words mean.
Remember, we talked about media reports
and how these are very often carefully worded
to avoid a lawsuit.
So suppose a report indicates that someone has been charged
with a crime or that he's being investigated.
All right, you have two words.
Charged and investigated.
It doesn't mean he's guilty.
Or suppose that someone is convicted and put in jail.
Well, that would apply to our young brothers in Korea, wouldn't it?
They were convicted and jailed.
And what was their crime?
They refused to kill someone?
Did they do anything wrong?
Or someone is found guilty by a man
as Jesus was and doesn't mean that he's guilty
in the sight of God.
So brothers, we really have to think about these things.
We may read that a person or an organization was sued
and then settled out of court.
Does settling out of court mean that they were guilty?
Not necessarily.
Now, in this country and others,
court cases are often handled by a jury.
Now, who are on the jury?
Ordinary citizens with no legal training.
But not only that.
These ordinary citizens don't always have access to all the facts
because the judge and lawyers decide which facts
will be shared with the jury.
So it's unlikely that the whole truth will ever come out in court.
Actually, neither side probably wants the whole truth
to come out in court.
Now, sometimes attorneys deliberately withhold information
that would be prejudicial to their clients.
And in addition, centuries have prejudices like everyone else
and some of them just can't set their prejudices aside.
I'll tell you an actual experience.
Some time ago, when lawyer told me about a case he had,
that was a case of medical malpractice by a doctor.
There was a jury.
At that trial, their doctor was clearly shown to be in the wrong.
But the jury didn't give the patient a penny.
The lawyer was confused, so after the trial,
he approached two of the jurors and asked,
if you don't mind, tell me which part of the testimony you didn't believe.
The jurors replied, oh, we didn't get that far.
The doctor was cute.
And we didn't want him to have to pay anything.
With deep thinkers like that,
no wonder many lawyers tried to settle their cases
rather than bring them to a jury.
But someone will say, no, I don't believe in settling out of court.
I believe in justice and truth.
So that brings up the question,
is it wrong to settle a matter before it goes to trial?
Or is it scriptural?
Let's let Jesus answer that question.
Turn to Matthew chapter 5,
verses 25 and 26.
Interesting that Jesus should mention this,
with all the important things that Jesus taught.
Matthew chapter 5, verses 25 and 26.
Be quick to settle matters with your legal opponent
while you are with him on the way there,
so that somehow the opponent may not turn you over to the judge,
and the judge to the court attendant,
and you get thrown into prison.
I say to you for a fact,
you will certainly not come out of there
until you have paid over your last small coin.
Now this is interesting.
Think about the Mosaic Law.
Was there any provision in the Mosaic Law
to throw someone in jail if he couldn't pay a debt?
That wasn't the way.
If he couldn't pay, he'd have to work it off.
Or a family member would have to work it off.
So when Jesus talks about prison and a judge,
he's obviously referring to what a Gentile judge would do.
And he couldn't necessarily expect justice from him.
Why might he rule against our brother?
Well, maybe he got paid under the table or the other party.
Or maybe he was prejudiced against the race
or the religion of the other party.
Now notice, Jesus didn't say
that the man should settle only if he was guilty.
So brothers, let's not be nor leave.
Don't believe everything you read.
Just because an article is called a news report
doesn't make it true.
And an editorial that someone's opinion
and that someone may be wrong.
And TV producers may have their own agenda,
prejudice, and viewpoint.
So what do we say in revision?
Inclusion.
Our faith is under attack.
And we have to fight.
And Jehovah gives us what we need to fight with.
One of the things he gives us, good associations.
Satan will try to lure us away from good associations.
He'll try to weaken our faith by getting us involved
in bad association without our knowing.
But Jehovah provides good association in the congregation.
These are people we know.
We love.
These are people who have our best interests at heart.
Keep in mind the principle we find at Proverbs 13 and verse 20.
The one walking with the wise will become wise.
But the one who has dealings with the stupid will fare badly.
You know the members of your congregation.
You know that they are wise.
You know that they have your best interests at heart.
But if you get involved in a forum,
you might not know whether you're walking with wise persons or not.
At least not at first.
So be careful.
If the conversation turns negative, get out.
Satan is behind the twisted teachings of apostates.
He's the father of the lie.
And those who lie are doing exactly what their father does.
The apostates have nothing to offer us, brothers.
They offer us hate.
All they have is to offer us criticism and negative talk.
But oh, how upbuilt we feel when we're with those who love Jehovah.
So Jehovah provides us with good, wholesome associations.
He also provides us with his word of truth.
Had an accurate knowledge of the truth is the best defense against apostasy.
Read the Bible every day and meditate on it.
Pay attention to the words.
Pay attention to what they mean.
Be like the Bereans, referred to at Acts chapter 17.
And verses 10 and 11.
Let's read that.
Acts chapter 17, verses 10 and 11.
Immediately by night, the brothers sent both Paul and Silas to Berea,
on arriving the winner of the synagogue of the Jews.
Now these were more noble-minded than those in Thessalonica.
For they accepted the word with the greatest eagerness of mind,
carefully examining the scriptures daily,
to see whether these things were so.
Now Paul compares the Bereans with the Thessalonians.
What do we know about the Thessalonians?
Well, they didn't have YouTube in those days.
But at one point, the Thessalonians apparently heard a rumor
that the day of Jehovah had arrived.
Who circulated the rumor?
An apostate?
Maybe.
But maybe it was just someone who had heard the rumor
and passed it on without checking it out.
Have you ever done that?
Passed on a report without checking the facts?
I think all of us have to admit that we've been guilty of that
at one time or another.
But now how did the Thessalonians react?
They were alarmed.
They were quickly shaken from their reason.
We mustn't let that happen to us.
When you hear something, check it out.
Don't just circulate it.
Don't just believe it.
Check it out.
Colossians 2, 6 and 7.
The last scripture we'll read during this talk.
Now here, Paul,
explains how we can avoid being quickly shaken from our reason.
Let's read this final scripture.
Colossians chapter 2, verses 6 and 7.
Therefore,
just as you have accepted Christ Jesus the Lord,
go on walking in union with Him.
You do that and you'll be walking with a wise one, certainly,
being rooted and built up in Him and then notices
and being stabilized in the faith just as you were taught.
If we're stabilized in the faith,
we won't be quickly shaken by unfounded accusations
by apostates or the media.
False rumors are often spread during wartime.
Brothers, this is war.
We need to put up a hard fight for the faith
as if our life depended on it,
because it does.
Thank you, brothers,
plain for that insightful talk.
This session has helped us to safeguard our faith
and to act in faith.
What can we look forward to in the next two sessions?
The scripture theme is Matthew 21, verse 21,
which says in part,
if you have faith,
it will happen.
The next session begins with the symposium highlighting
women of strong faith,
and we eagerly anticipate the public Bible discourse
have faith in the good news.
Now let's sing together song number 38,
which draws attention to our source of power, Jehovah God.
This song is entitled,
He will make you strong.
After the song,
you may have your local concluding prayer.
Again, that song number 38.